A Brief Explanation of the Practice and System of the Thirty-Seven Heap Maṇḍala Offering Prostration to the guru. The practice of the maṇḍala is as follows. In the beginning, in front of a visualized field of merit, carefully wipe the maṇḍala plate to symbolize that the nature of mind is stainless. After that, hold the maṇḍala plate in the left hand, together with some flowers. With your right hand, hold a flower between the thumb and index finger, extend the rest of the fingers and moisten them with saffron water and the five substances. Apply this to the maṇḍala, drawing a circle along the edge in a counterclockwise manner. Alternatively, after sprinkling the maṇḍala with perfumed water to symbolize never parting from the moisture of compassion and bodhicitta, draw a circle along the circumference of the plate with the ring finger, forming the external boundary. Recite OṂ VAJRA BHŪMI ĀḤ HŪṂ. With that recitation, think that a vast and great sphere, made of the elements stacked on top of one another, combined with the mighty golden ground, instantaneously appears on top of the maṇḍala. Saying OṂ VAJRA REKHE ĀḤ HŪṂ, visualize a circular boundary of iron mountains. Without lifting your hand from the maṇḍala, place the flower held in the right hand in the center with the recitation of HŪṂ to remove obstacles. Place a large heap upon that same place and visualize Mount Sumeru in the middle of the great ocean. Its eastern side is made of crystal, its southern side of lapis lazuli, its western side of ruby, and its northern side of gold. Place a heap in the east for Pūrvavideha, which is semicircular and made of crystal. Place a heap in the south for Jambudvīpa, which is in the shape of an axe-head and made of lapis lazuli. In the same way, visualize the others with the placing of each heap: in the west is Aparagodānīya, which is circular in shape and made of ruby, and in the north Uttarakuru, which is square and made of gold. All these continents are facing away from the center. The eastern continent has Deha to its right and Videha to its left. The southern continent has Cāmara to its right and Aparacāmara to its left. The western continent has Sāthā to its right and Uttaramantriṇa to its left. The northern continent has Kurava to its right and Kaurava to its left. All these subcontinents resemble their main continents in shape and material. On the eastern continent is the precious mountain, made of various precious substances. Its width and height are immeasurable. On the southern continent is the wish-granting tree, its trunk made of seven precious materials. It has perfect roots, trunk, branches, leaves, flowers, and fruits. It provides everything that one desires. On the western continent is the wish-granting cow, reddish gold in color. It has a perfect form, beautiful to behold. It provides desirable objects without effort. On the northern continent there is the uncultivated harvest, perfect in taste and nourishment. In front of the precious mountain is the thousand-spoked wheel, made from the gold found in the Jambu river. It shines as brightly as two suns. Although it is pulled by no one, it can miraculously travel one hundred thousand yojanas in a day. Through its power, one can easily bring the four kinds of army through the sky to the four continents and the Realm of the Thirty-Three. In front of the wish-granting tree is the precious jewel, an eight-sided lapis lazuli. Its light reaches an area of one hundred yojanas, making the region as bright as day even during the night. It is soothing when one is tormented by heat and warm when one is too cold. Wherever the jewel remains, it removes all sickness and untimely demise. It can fulfill almost everything one can wish for. In front of the wish-granting cow is the precious queen. She is free of the five faults and endowed with the eight qualities. One never tires of seeing her. She spreads sweet fragrance, her mere touch is capable of giving supreme joy, and she has mastered the sixty-four arts of desire. In whichever continent she lives, she removes hunger, thirst, and sadness. In front of the uncultivated harvest is the precious minister, who understands and accomplishes whatever the ruler of the land wishes without being told. With a perfect physique, being strong and skilled, he is expert in making the troops advance, hold their position, and retreat. He is ornamented with silk and jewels. In the southeastern direction, between Aparacāmara and Deha, is the precious elephant, ash white in color with six tusks. The crown of its head is red and high, and its face is covered with a net of precious jewels. It has the strength of one thousand ordinary elephants and does no harm to others without reason. It walks slowly and peacefully. It brings victory in all battles. In the southwestern direction, between Cāmara and Uttaramantriṇa is the precious supreme horse. It has a blue coat, beautiful like the feathers on a peacock's throat. It is magnificent, with excellent health and sturdy limbs. When commanded, it has such strength of speed that it can course around Jambudvīpa three times in one day. In the northwestern direction, between Sāthā and Kurava is the precious general. He is strong and skilled in warfare. He is dressed in metal armor and magnificent in appearance. Alternatively, one can visualize a precious householder who delights all people. He is trustworthy, without any deceit, and has an inexhaustible treasury, filled with substances such as precious vajras, sapphires, emeralds, gold, silver, white coral, and so on. It is taught that one can visualize either of these two. In the northeastern direction, between Kaurava and Videha are the excellent treasure-vases that fulfill all desires effortlessly. Some say that the continents are oriented toward the center, with the subcontinents situated on the right and left of them respectively. In that case, the southern subcontinent Cāmara would have to be in the southeast. That would mean that the subcontinent of the rākṣasas would be in the southeastern direction, so the rākṣasa who is one of the protectors of the ten directions would also have to come from there, which contradicts the way it is generally explained in Dharma texts. Many sources mention this, and in particular the Ocean of Sindhu states: The subcontinent Cāmara in the southwestern direction is the land of rakṣasas. The Laṅkāvatāra Sūtra is also known to have been taught on this continent. Aparacāmara was the name given to the other subcontinent when the son of a rākṣasa king was banished there. Considering the continents to be oriented away from the center, the sūtra teaches that the direction in front of each of the continents is south, to their right is west, behind them is north, and to their left is east. Sumeru, the king of mountains, is in the center, situated to the north of all four continents. This is also how it is taught in the Abhidharma. In front of the precious wheel is the goddess of seductive grace, assuming an elegant pose. Beautiful to behold, she displays the exceptionally graceful expressions of her youth. In front of the precious jewel is the goddess of garlands, holding a garland in her hands. In front of the precious queen is the goddess of song, singing a melodious song. In front of the precious minister is the goddess of dance, dancing playfully. In front of the precious elephant, in the southeastern direction, is the goddess of flowers, holding flowers. In front of the precious supreme horse, in the southwestern direction, is the goddess of incense, holding incense. In front of the precious general, in the northwestern direction, is the goddess of lights, holding a butter lamp. In front of the great treasure vase, in the northeastern direction, is the goddess of scented water, holding scented water. In the sky, in front of the goddess of grace, is the sun. Its sphere is made of fire crystal. In the sky, in front of the goddess of song, is the moon. Its sphere is made of water crystal. In front of the goddess of dance is the precious parasol, white in color with a golden handle. In the sky, in front of the goddess of garlands, is the banner of universal victory. The space in between these objects, and in the midst of them, is piled all the perfect wealth of gods and humans. This was written by Mañjughoṣa. Sarvadā kalyāṇaṃ bhavatu. 
